For thousands of years, at every stage of civilization’s development, humans have
debated existential questions such as the meaning of life and what differs between right and
wrong. Ever since humans could write, people have argued both sides of nearly any situation.
The more society progresses, one would expect more answers to these questions, but often all
we face are more questions. This phenomenon occurs because, in many cases, there is no way
to know what is the right decision and which choices are wrong. We cannot hit replay and see
what the outcome would have been had we made a different decision. However, we can live by
a certain playbook, as individuals and as a society, that governs our actions and ensures we
stay on the most morally correct path possible. To enable this, we must make decisions with
both rationality and sensibility, allow a set of standards to govern society but still allow
autonomy, and have strong moral character regardless of the intensity of the situation.

The two sides of the decision-making spectrum are rationality and sensibility. Rationality
leads to the most mathematically calculable positive benefit, essentially which outcome seems
best on paper. Sensibility is more concerned with the feelings of those involved as the most
important factor in making the ethically correct decision. Oftentimes, these situations have
congruency in choosing the best decision, but not always. For example, when a couple goes on
a first date, the host normally offers to pay for the other person’s food. Rationally, this doesn’t
make sense. If it is her food, then she should pay for it. However, the sensibility aspect of
situational decision-making usually leads one to understand the social implications of paying for
another person’s meal, and it also makes one recognize the benefit of making the other person
feel respected and cared for.

In society, it is necessary that we understand both the rational aspect of decision-making
and the sensibility side. Making decisions only with the rational mind will lead us to an
individualistic and cold society. Albeit fair, living like this would not induce the synergy that
advanced civilizations can bring, sharing and helping one another altruistically. Likewise, we
cannot make decisions only by factoring in sensibility and neglecting the rational mind. This
would ultimately lead to too much focus on feelings and less drive and accomplishment in
society. Rationality is necessary in order for people to take a step back and look at situations
objectively, making the best decision before considering who are all parties involved. There is
no way to quantify how much of each decision-making method we should use (e.g., 60% of
decisions should be rational and 40% should be sensible), but we must take a unique look at
every situation in which we are involved. in order to maintain the highest ethical standing, it is
necessary to weigh the outcomes of any decision and choose the path that leads to the most
overall benefit. This benefit could be to the one making the decision or the greatest benefit to all
parties involved; it is highly dependent on the situation and what opportunities all stakeholders
had leading up to the decision itself. If people make all decisions considering both rationality
and sensibility, we will live together in a more fair, just, successful, and ethically correct society.